---
title: "Tidal Marsh Sediment Accretion; October 2024"
author: "Savannah K. Miller"
format: docx
editor: visual
bibliography: references.bib
---

## Ride the Wave: Sediment Accretion Keeps in Line with Sea Level Rise Modeling Predictions in San Francisco, California

Savannah K. Miller, Kerstin Wasson, Matt Ferner, etc. (potential co-authors here)

Hyperlink to your Github repository: https://github.com/Smillersfsu/Biol708.git

Marsh lands, crucial transitional ecosystems between estuaries and adjacent terrestrial areas, face significant threats from sea level rise and urbanization. In this modern era, these threats can intensify the exposure and intensity of effects of tidal action and salinity exposure on marshland ecosystems, which can have downhill affects to vegetative species composition that acts as the basis of each ecotone (@taylor-burns2023). In order to retain enough space for the marshes to experience a wide range of conditions in salinity and tidal action across the ecotones, there are questions that remain on how to accrete sediment to keep pace with expected sea level rise. While previous studies have used numerical models to forecast sediment accretion patterns and assess species diversity effects, few have employed field measurements (@ganju2005, @belliard2016).

This study investigates sediment accretion rates in relation to vegetative species transects and elevation across multiple marshland ecosystems within the San Francisco Bay estuary. Our aim is to determine potential relationships among these factors, informing management decisions regarding applied sediment deposition in marshland ecosystems. We examine how sediment accretes through different ecotones and its impact on species diversity.

By focusing on the interplay between sediment accretion, vegetation, and elevation, this research addresses a critical knowledge gap in understanding marsh ecosystem dynamics under changing environmental conditions that have the potential to disturb the foundation of an important and increasingly rare ecosystem.

<!--Marsh lands are habitats that are essential to coastal estuarine systems, that act as a transitional ecosystem between the estuary and the terrestrial ecosystems adjacent to the estuary. As a byproduct of sea level rise, marsh lands are at risk due to the expected change in elevation of tidal action and exposure to salinity, which would conversely affect the vegetation species that establish each ecotone through the species assemblage. Unfortunately, urbanization has already further restricted the range at which the marshland ecosystems can migrate further upland with sea level rise. Salinity and sediment accretion, across different transition zones of the marsh ecotones, was highlighted as a further area of study that warranted further data to be accumulated. Thus, sediment accretion within a natural system, amongst other factors such as expected sea level rise, etc. are expected to have a much greater effect ( @taylor-burns2023). This issue has been explored through numerical models forecasting and estimating patterns of sediment accretion (@ganju2005) the effects of the species diversity (@belliard2016), but few studies have been doing using rudimentary field collection measurements of sediment. In this paper, we explore through multiple estuarine marshland ecosystems within the San Francisco Bay estuary the sediment accretion rates in correlation with the vegetative species transects and elevation. We hope to conclude if there is a relationship between these three factors, so management decisions can be made regarding applied sediment deposition within marshland ecosystems, and how it accretes through different ecotones, and conversely how the species diversity in each of those ecotones is affected.  Introductory paragraph with a few citations-->
